[quote author=Alexphysics link=topic=37599.msg1940978#msg1940978 date=1556529728]
One thing I saw on your post is your talk about FH first stage and ICPS as second stage not being viable because first stage shuts down weeeell below LEO speed. But something I had in my mind today while thinking about it is that ICPS mass is like 4 times less than a normal F9 S2 so what would that mean for staging speed? I know it is less optimal than flying it on top of S2 and not in the place of it but I would like to see one of your cool animations about that at least to feed my curiousity haha
[/quote]

I have to admit that curiosity finally got the better of me on this one. On a hypothetical FH GEO-sat mission, expendable boosters would likely stage at about 3km/s, and the core at about 5km/s. But, as you suggest, replacing FH S2 + payload with a 30t ICPS should result in staging velocities that are quite a bit higher.

Taking the Arabsat-6A mission profile as a model, SpaceX are starting to use engine shutdowns to limit acceleration as well as throttling. This makes sense if, like rocket engines in general, the Merlin engine is most efficient at full throttle. Arabsat had two booster shutdown events at around 90 and 120 seconds into flight, limiting boosted acceleration to around 2gs. Maximum core acceleration was about 3gs. For AlexPhysics's scenario, I've assumed a higher limit of 4gs, just to see 'what if'.

To keep under 4gs, both the boosters and the core require 6 shutdown events each (the first two core events are within a second of each other, so they aren't distinguishable on the plot). This is not efficient, because literally tonnes of hardware are being lofted to space without being fully utilised. The staging events are now at 4 and 7km/s, only 800m/s short of orbital velocity. However, ICPS would still need to burn about 6t of its own propellant to make orbit. Total mass to LEO is about 25t, not much more than a single expendable F9 + S2 can deliver at 22.8t. If the g limits were lower, performance would be worse.

If nothing else, I think this scenario demonstrates the importance of the relative sizing and thrust of stages. Although not ideal, the greater mass and thrust of the Falcon S2 is simply a better match for the FH boost and core stages than ICPS. ICPS on SLS works better, because SLS gets ICPS + ESM + Orion to well above orbital velocity, where thrust/weight is no longer the dominant parameter, and Isp is everything.